---
layout: post
title: "Oh, God!"
category: opinions
image: true
image-cat: 'the-kernel'
dated: June 10 - 16, 2018
archive: true
---

Oh, God!
BoniQuirog, Ph.D.

In the Roman Catholic Church where most Boholanos belong, Flores de Mayo officially ends this week. It is a beautiful practice for Catholic girls and ladies. 
Meanwhile, a protestant fanatic who thinks his beliefs are superior to mine keeps visiting our office and pleading for at least ten minutes of our time to convince us of his views. This is happening because we gave him the initial impression that we are open-minded about new ideas regarding God.

But we found a 15-page confession of a former member of his group narrating the mental torture and economic sacrifices that such member went through. We gave it to the guy in the hope that his eyes will be opened. We do not know what happened next.  
But the main thing that makes us human and superior to animals is our thinking. If we really use our thinking, we must consider these:

Many, if not most of us, will probably claim that “we know God”. Really? Are you sure? What then is God? Who is God? How did you know God?

The differences are quite numerous such that there are more than 35,000 different sects of Christianity alone. There are also many kinds of Muslims, many kinds of Buddhists, Hindus, etc. etc. And all of that’s because people could hardly agree on their ideas about God.

We take it for granted that “the sun rises in the east in the morning and sets in the west in the afternoon”. Where and how did we get that kind of belief? Is it true? What are the facts concerning the sun?

We tend to believe that “the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York were pulverized by terrorists using planes on September 11, 2001”. Is it true? Is it really possible for such huge buildings to be pulverized that way? What have scientists, particularly physicists, proven about these questions? Did we care to find out?
You’d tend to believe “that most terrorists in the world today are Muslims and the victims are non-Muslims”. Would you be shocked to know that most victims are actually Muslims? Find out for yourself.

We presume that women are weaker than men. If you happen to see Hidilyn Diaz and me, you would probably conclude that I am bigger, taller and stronger than her. But that is far from the truth. She is the only Filipina to have won the silver medal in the Olympics by lifting 213 kilos of weight. I don’t know if I can even lift 50 kilos of rice.

A powerful politician may order his goons to “Kill, kill, kill”. Our Lord Jesus Christ says “We reap what we sow. Those who live by the sword shall die by the sword”. Someone must be wrong here.  Who do you think it is?

In today’s life, you are called successful if you have a nice house, nice car, lots of money and nice body. But Scripture says, “Do not store up earthly treasures because they will decay and wither away”. Something must be wrong here somewhere. Which one is it?

Now, friends, don’t be too sure about your beliefs. Think harder. It is better to be honest and admit our ignorance than to pretend that we really know for sure, and delude ourselves.