---
layout: post
title: "The Sea"
category: opinions
image: true
image-cat: 'sundry'
dated: August 05 - 11, 2018
---

We had a male helper from the hinterland of Bohol who did not rinse himself after bathing in the sea. We cringe at the thought of salt clinging to our body. He would say: The sea has medicinal and therapeutic effect.

We dismissed his idea as absurd and a wild notion of people who lived far from the sea. But lately researchers and medical practitioners are rediscovering the therapeutic effects of sea water.

When we were toddlers whenever we had a cough, our parents brought us at twilight time to the wharf of our town. They said the soft cold salty breeze from the sea is therapeutic. The wharf became crowded with coughing children.

This notion of long ago was forgotten for so long because it was overshadowed by the bombardment of medical information extolling the beneficial effects of expensive synthetic drugs.But nowadays medical science is going back to the basics.

My cousin who is a nun in Italy had polyps in her throat and nostrils. Her doctor did not prescribe her with antibiotics nor surgery, but bathing at the warm waters of the Mediterranean        Sea for one month. She was driven south of Rome and for a month she was freed from the humdrum routine of prayers, cleaning and at the refectory. 

Swimming around withgiant trout and angel fish at the ancient and historic waters of Italy cleanse her of her ailment. 

The wife of a friend based in Manila had suffered also an ailment onher nose. Her doctor told her to stay near the beach for its clean and fresh air from the sea. She was cured of her ailment which made her buy the unknown resort she was staying. She improved the resort with state-of-the are amenities. She marketed it on the social media and now it globally renowned.

Some years ago, watery discharge came out from my nose. It was itchy and kept me sneezing. I went to the Ear, Nose and Eye (ENT) specialist. It turned out I developed nasal allergy to the perfume I had been using since I was in college.

The doctor prescribed me with three nasal spray of sodium chloride at different prices to be used at different times of the day plus some pellets of histamine to be taken at bedtime which made me extremely tired on the next day. I followed the doctor’s prescription for a month. I was cured of the medicine, but when I am in my unguarded moments, it will recur again.

Then I found out that sodium chloride is the number one mineral composition of the sea water. I remembered my cousin in Italy which prompted me to go again to the sea. It was only a matter of three days bathing at the sea water which completely freed me from nasal allergy.

QUOTE OF THE WEEK: Everything has its own season. 
